README.md, before:

# dogviz
A domain object graph (**DOG**) visualisation built on [ruby-graphviz](https://github.com/glejeune/Ruby-Graphviz) and hence [Graphviz](http://www.graphviz.org/)

## Usage

Clone this repo then:

```
gem install dogviz
ruby examples/dogfood.rb
```

## Example

Here is the diagram rendered by running the [dogfood example](examples/dogfood.rb)

![generated graph from examples/dogfood.rb](/examples/dogviz-generated.jpg "Generated diagram")

Use the simple DSL to build your domain graph of *things* which can be in *containers*, which in turn can be nested.

*Things* can point to other *things*.

Because this is ruby you can use known refactorings for **DOG** construction: extract methods, push into classes etc.

No external DSL rubbish here! ;)

```ruby
require 'dogviz'

def create_classes_description(root)
  classes = root.container('classes')
  system = classes.thing('System')
  thing = classes.thing('Thing')
  container = classes.thing('Container')
  container.points_to thing, name: 'contains'
  container.points_to container, name: 'contains'
  system.points_to thing, name: 'contains'
  system.points_to container, name: 'contains'

  classes
end

def create_nested_container_example(root)
  example = root.container 'example DOG'
  thing = example.thing 'a thing outside a container'
  container = example.container 'a container'
  container_thing = container.thing 'a thing in a container'
  nested_container = container.container 'a nested container'
  nested_c_thing = nested_container.thing 'a thing in a nested container'

  container_thing.points_to nested_c_thing
  nested_c_thing.points_to thing, name: 'things point to other things'

  nested_container
end

def create_dog(classes: true)
  domain_object_graph = Dogviz::System.new 'dogviz'

  create_classes_description(domain_object_graph) if classes
  usage = domain_object_graph.group('usage')

  create_nested_container_example(usage)

  domain_object_graph
end

create_dog().output jpg: 'examples/dogviz-generated.jpg'

dog_rolled_up = create_dog(classes: false)
dog_rolled_up.find('a nested container').rollup!
dog_rolled_up.output jpg: 'examples/dogviz-rolled-up-generated.jpg'
```

## Rolling up

You can **rollup!** *containers* before rendering so that a single **DOG** can be used to render simplified views.

The following output from above example shows how diagram can be simplified by *rolling up* the nested container.
Note that pointers to/from contained things are handled gracefully ([i think](https://github.com/damned/dogviz/blob/master/tests/test_dogviz_graphviz_rendering.rb#L97) :/).

![generated rolled up graph from examples/dogfood.rb](/examples/dogviz-rolled-up-generated.jpg "Generated rolled up diagram")

## Other Features

### #nominate
*Containers* can **#nominate** a thing so that it is referenceable via a method call on container.

It's useful if some code somewhere builds a container with multiple thing entry points you might want to point to

```ruby
def create_c(sys)
  c = sys.container('c')
  c.nominate a: c.thing('a')
  c.nominate b: c.thing('b')
  c
end

c = create_c(sys)
x = sys.thing('x')
x.points_to c.a
x.points_to c.b
```

### #doclink

Add a documentation link to *thing* so that url can be visited clicking on the *thing* an svg output.

```ruby
thing.doclink("https://github.com/")
```

### splines

Splines can be turned on or off by providing flag to System.new

```ruby
System.new 'dog', splines: false
```

### Extendable classes

Using standard ruby extension of **System**, **Container** and **Thing** classes, you can easily use:
 - language specific to your domain 
 - styling specific to your types
 
```ruby
module Creators
  def box(name, options={})
    add Box.new(self, name, options)
  end
end
class WebsiteSystem < System
  include Creators
end
class Box < Container
  def initialize(parent, name, options={})
    super parent, name, {style: 'filled', color: '#ffaaaa'}.merge(options)
  end
  def process(name)
    add Process.new self, name
  end
end
class Process < Thing
  def initialize(parent, name)
    super parent, name, style: 'filled'
  end
  def calls(callee, options={})
    points_to callee, options
  end
end

sys = WebsiteSystem.new 'website'
box = sys.box('website box')
box.process('nginx').calls(box.process('app'))
```

### Next

Some refactoring, separate styling from domain (CSS-like probably), split into graph-description, manipulation and layout sub-gems, maybe re-use proper graph lib.

For more (too much) detail see todo.txt.

Commit message:

Add instructions to run in docker

README.md, after:

# dogviz
A domain object graph (**DOG**) visualisation built on [ruby-graphviz](https://github.com/glejeune/Ruby-Graphviz) and hence [Graphviz](http://www.graphviz.org/)

## Run in docker

Ensure docker is installed.

Clone this repo then:


```
./shell
```

This will give you a shell within the ruby container with this dir mounted.  Next you can complete installation with:

```
bundle install
apt update && apt install graphviz
rake test
ruby examples/dogfood.rb
```

## Run in direct in your machine's ruby

*NB This is the way i used to run this but personally i don't recommend it as the mechanisms for managing multiple
ruby versions - and the same would go for python etc. - are just not as isolated as running in docker, are more complex,
less reproducible and can lead to hard to unpick or non-obvious issues. That said, knock yourself out :)*

Ensure you have a working ruby environment.

Clone this repo then:

```
gem install dogviz
ruby examples/dogfood.rb
```

## Example

Here is the diagram rendered by running the [dogfood example](examples/dogfood.rb)

![generated graph from examples/dogfood.rb](examples/dogviz-generated.jpg "Generated diagram")

Use the simple DSL to build your domain graph of *things* which can be in *containers*, which in turn can be nested.

*Things* can point to other *things*.

Because this is ruby you can use known refactorings for **DOG** construction: extract methods, push into classes etc.

No external DSL rubbish here! ;)

```ruby
require 'dogviz'

def create_classes_description(root)
  classes = root.container('classes')
  system = classes.thing('System')
  thing = classes.thing('Thing')
  container = classes.thing('Container')
  container.points_to thing, name: 'contains'
  container.points_to container, name: 'contains'
  system.points_to thing, name: 'contains'
  system.points_to container, name: 'contains'

  classes
end

def create_nested_container_example(root)
  example = root.container 'example DOG'
  thing = example.thing 'a thing outside a container'
  container = example.container 'a container'
  container_thing = container.thing 'a thing in a container'
  nested_container = container.container 'a nested container'
  nested_c_thing = nested_container.thing 'a thing in a nested container'

  container_thing.points_to nested_c_thing
  nested_c_thing.points_to thing, name: 'things point to other things'

  nested_container
end

def create_dog(classes: true)
  domain_object_graph = Dogviz::System.new 'dogviz'

  create_classes_description(domain_object_graph) if classes
  usage = domain_object_graph.group('usage')

  create_nested_container_example(usage)

  domain_object_graph
end

create_dog().output jpg: 'examples/dogviz-generated.jpg'

dog_rolled_up = create_dog(classes: false)
dog_rolled_up.find('a nested container').rollup!
dog_rolled_up.output jpg: 'examples/dogviz-rolled-up-generated.jpg'
```

## Rolling up

You can **rollup!** *containers* before rendering so that a single **DOG** can be used to render simplified views.

The following output from above example shows how diagram can be simplified by *rolling up* the nested container.
Note that pointers to/from contained things are handled gracefully ([i think](https://github.com/damned/dogviz/blob/master/tests/test_dogviz_graphviz_rendering.rb#L97) :/).

![generated rolled up graph from examples/dogfood.rb](examples/dogviz-rolled-up-generated.jpg "Generated rolled up diagram")

## Other Features

### #nominate
*Containers* can **#nominate** a thing so that it is referenceable via a method call on container.

It's useful if some code somewhere builds a container with multiple thing entry points you might want to point to

```ruby
def create_c(sys)
  c = sys.container('c')
  c.nominate a: c.thing('a')
  c.nominate b: c.thing('b')
  c
end

c = create_c(sys)
x = sys.thing('x')
x.points_to c.a
x.points_to c.b
```

### #doclink

Add a documentation link to *thing* so that url can be visited clicking on the *thing* an svg output.

```ruby
thing.doclink("https://github.com/")
```

### splines

Splines can be turned on or off by providing flag to System.new

```ruby
System.new 'dog', splines: false
```

### Extendable classes

Using standard ruby extension of **System**, **Container** and **Thing** classes, you can easily use:
 - language specific to your domain 
 - styling specific to your types
 
```ruby
module Creators
  def box(name, options={})
    add Box.new(self, name, options)
  end
end
class WebsiteSystem < System
  include Creators
end
class Box < Container
  def initialize(parent, name, options={})
    super parent, name, {style: 'filled', color: '#ffaaaa'}.merge(options)
  end
  def process(name)
    add Process.new self, name
  end
end
class Process < Thing
  def initialize(parent, name)
    super parent, name, style: 'filled'
  end
  def calls(callee, options={})
    points_to callee, options
  end
end

sys = WebsiteSystem.new 'website'
box = sys.box('website box')
box.process('nginx').calls(box.process('app'))
```

### Next

Some refactoring, separate styling from domain (CSS-like probably), split into graph-description, manipulation and layout sub-gems, maybe re-use proper graph lib.

For more (too much) detail see todo.txt.
